University of Waterloo Strategic Plan 2013
A Distinguished Past - A Distinctive Future
Brandmark of the University of Waterloo

A Distinguished Past - A Distinctive Future
contents
4 a distinctive future
6 Waterloo’s vision 
8 a distinguished past
10 Charting a course for growth 
12 Waterloo’s distinct advantage
14 Waterloo’s promise
16 experiential education for all 
18 a uniquely entrepreneurial university
20 transformational research
25 Building on a foundation of excellence
26 outstanding academic programming 
30 Global prominence and internationalization
32 vibrant student experience
34 robust employer-staff relationship
35 Promoting a sound value system
39 Uniquely qualified to answer the world’s call
40 a track record of innovation and excellence
44 Poised for action

A distinctive Future
the world beckons. For a fast-evolving globe, where the pace of emerging challenges 
often outstrips available answers, conventional approaches to higher education, 
innovation and discovery are no longer enough. 
answering that call requires a bold and unconventional approach — one that combines 
deep knowledge, extraordinary research, broad-based experience and academic excellence. 
it requires interdisciplinary approaches and a single-minded and forward-looking 
focus on advancing knowledge and meeting society’s needs. 
Without hesitation, the university of Waterloo accepts this challenge.
Waterloo is the right institution at the right time. Waterloo’s strategic plan 
charts a distinctive course for an institution defined by our distinguished past. 
it builds on the traditions of excellence established by our founders, with a 
clear view of where energy and resources must be focused in order to achieve our 
full potential as a world leader in higher education. it will be anchored by an 
accountability framework that measures and monitors progress towards our ambitious 
but achievable goals. 
over the next five years, building on foundational strengths and propelled by the 
promises outlined in this strategic plan, we will answer the call of society and 
emerge as one of the world’s top innovation universities. 
this plan is the collective vision of our campus community and partners, based on 
consultations and feedback from hundreds of our students, faculty, staff, alumni 
and stakeholders. this is our strategic plan, and we each have a vital role to 
play in its ultimate success. 
Signature of Feridun Hamdullahpur,
President and Vice-Chancellor,
University of Waterloo
FERIDUN HAMDULLAHPUR
President and vice-Chancellor, University of Waterloo

Over the next five years, this institution’s foundational strengths will serve 
as a springboard, propelling Waterloo towards a single goal:
to be recognized As one oF the top innovAtion universities in the World. 
Waterloo will do this by focusing energy and allocating resources into areas that 
will set this institution apart, ensure the best experience for students and serve 
as a model for the future of higher education. experiential education for all in a 
uniquely entrepreneurial university environment, where faculty and students engage 
in transformational research. Waterloo will build this dynamic future on a foundation 
of excellent academic programming, global prominence, vibrant student experience, 
robust employer-staff relationship and a sound value system.

A Distinguished Past
the university of Waterloo was founded in the aspirational era following the 
Second World War, a time when the world was rapidly rebuilding and racing to 
create a new and better future. New industries and technologies were emerging, 
with space seen as the new frontier.
A Unique Approach to Higher Education
sophisticated practical skills were urgently needed, and Waterloo’s unique 
approach to higher education was seen as the solution to this growing societal 
need. the mission was to educate graduates with impeccable academic knowledge 
and the ability to fast track into employment, a skill derived from work terms 
in their chosen field. co-operative education started in 1957 in engineering, 
then spread to science and mathematics, and subsequently to all other faculties.
At the Heart of the Technology Revolution
recognizing the value of early computers as a teaching and research tool, Waterloo 
was an early adopter of the technology, and on the vanguard of the information age. 
starting in the 1960s, information technology innovations flourished at the university, 
including Watfor and Watfiv, early fortran compilers that revolutionized efficient 
compilation and put Waterloo’s computer science program on the international map. 
from there, Waterloo developed globally recognized high-technology expertise, 
which fuelled significant economic spin-offs. the growth of many start-up companies 
helped earn the region around the university a reputation as the “silicon valley 
of the north.” 
A Culture of Innovation and Connection
springing from Waterloo’s unique history is a strong culture of innovation and a 
can-do attitude in its students, faculty and staff. a tradition of incorporating 
relevance and applicability into teaching and research programs is inspired by 
Waterloo’s longstanding commitment to meet the intellectual and practical challenges 
that arise from societal change. A strong track record of engagement with industry — 
evolving from co-op and continuing through its research programs — fosters an 
innovative and entrepreneurial culture. 
Serving a Fast-Changing Society
a singularly powerful and long-standing principle of the University of Waterloo 
is to anticipate the needs of society and respond effectively as challenges arise. 
this principle was a key motivator behind both the founding of this institution 
and its early commitment to creative thought, applied knowledge and experiential 
learning. Waterloo looks to the future with energy, enthusiasm and commitment to 
its core strengths, while identifying key new areas of discovery, innovation and 
application that will further elevate its reputation as a research powerhouse 
offering superior quality education.

Charting a Course for Growth
responding to the challenges of rapidly changing social, environmental and economic 
conditions, the university has embarked on a comprehensive strategic planning process 
in order to identify new opportunities to serve society as effectively as possible, 
further advancing its reputation for excellence, innovation and relevance.
Staying True to the Mission
Waterloo’s mission is charted in the University of Waterloo act as “the pursuit of 
learning through scholarship, teaching and research within a spirit of free enquiry 
and expression.” over the last several years, the university has been guided in this 
mission by the sixth decade Plan, formulated in 2006. at the midway juncture, a 
review of its goals and objectives was undertaken in the light of changing world 
conditions. the mid-cycle review involved a series of wide-ranging consultations 
with key stakeholder groups — students, faculty, staff, alumni, donors and selected 
community leaders. 
the review highlighted priorities for the next five years that build on the 
university’s foundational pillars: academic excellence, research excellence and 
impact, co-operative education, graduate studies, internationalization and 
entrepreneurship.

Mid-Cycle Review Consultations Included:
40 Meetings with over 60 groups of students, faculty, staff, alumni and community leaders
online survey
2449 responses
1199 undergraduate students 
288 graduate students 
228 faculty 
346 staff 
88 alumni 
300 undeclared role
75 stakeholder group representatives
uwaterloo.ca/strategic-plan

Waterloo's Distinct Advantage
profound change — occurring at breakneck speed — is a defining characteristic of this era. 
institutions that aspire to greatness must eagerly embrace change. in the future, 
successful universities will be defined by the ability to meet emerging challenges. 
in this regard, Waterloo will add to its record of success by mobilizing its strengths — 
research and scholarship and purposeful in-depth teaching and learning — in new ways 
and with a clear and accurate understanding of the world. 
relevance is defined in global terms, not regional or national. impact is measured 
against higher standards not just of academic learning, but also of contribution to 
society’s well-being. this is where Waterloo excels and will continue to do so with 
unwavering commitment.
over the next five years, this institution’s foundational strengths will serve as 
a springboard, propelling Waterloo towards a single goal: to be recognized as one 
of the top innovation universities in the world.

Over the next five years, inspired by our culture of innovation, WAterloo Will

Transform education and economies with experiential learning for all
Build its reputation as a uniquely entrepreneurial university
Change lives and advance industries through high-impact, highly-relevant research

Experiential Education for All
Goal
Be the world-leading university in co-op education and other forms of experiential 
and work-integrated learning
Whether enhanced by research opportunities or real-world experience, Waterloo is 
proof that higher education can’t — and shouldn’t — be constrained by classroom walls. 
as the pioneer and the world’s leading provider of post-secondary co-operative education, 
Waterloo has long recognized that learning is stronger when knowledge is tried and tested. 
experience-based learning produces graduates that are uniquely employable — ready 
to not just fill jobs, but to lead. 
Over the Next Five Years
Waterloo will take co-operative education to the next level, making experiential 
education an integral part of the way all students learn. embracing new and emerging 
technologies, Waterloo’s unique brand of education will reshape lifelong learning 
for students on and beyond its campuses. recognizing the value of broad experiences 
in a global economy, Waterloo will increase opportunities for international work-terms, 
exchanges and research opportunities.
Background
Co-operative education programs at Waterloo have undoubtedly been one of the most 
powerful incentives that draw students to the university. in blending alternating 
intervals of academic learning on campus with periods of experiential learning as 
an employee, the student is given a full and relevant educational experience. the 
graduating co-op student thus has a comprehensive understanding of how an organization 
works and what it requires of an employee, which proves to be a valuable attribute in 
acquiring employment upon graduation.
World-Ready Graduates
as a truly global institution, Waterloo offers a wide range of international learning 
opportunities and experiences, and educates graduates who are at home in a culturally 
diverse environment and knowledgeable about its attributes.
The Future of Co-operative Education
Waterloo can rightfully boast the largest co-op education program of any university 
in the world. the university intends to widen the learning experience to include 
work-related activities, wherever the activity offers a genuine learning experience 
of a work situation. included in this type of experiential learning will be 
entrepreneurial pursuits, clinical internships and practicums required in programs 
such as psychology, social work and optometry; and community service and fieldwork 
activities which expose the student to the practical application of academic theory.

Primary Objectives
Educate outstanding and world-ready graduates whose skills are in high demand globally
Enlarge the resource base of professionally credentialized and/or discipline-relevant employers
Achieve a closer integration of research opportunities and co-op work terms
Expand experiential learning to include service-based activities and international programs

supporting Actions
Enhancing the interaction between the university and the co-op employer base 
Integrating more effectively the outcome of a student’s work term into the student’s 
academic program
Increasing opportunities for students’ first work terms
Increasing awareness of the value of co-op and other forms of experiential learning 
among potential students, employers and external audiences
Increasing the number of research-oriented work terms 
Expanding and supporting work term opportunities internationally 
Expanding the employer recognition (appreciation) program
Improving opportunities for co-op employers and students to have input into the co-op process 
Developing professional skills courses to benefit non-co-op undergraduate students
Using alumni networks to expand co-op work term opportunities
Creating an organizational framework to promote, develop, implement and manage the 
use of experiential learning
Creating student mobility programs that utilize the best universities and practices 
in the world in support of academic exchange, international service learning, field 
programs and international co-op placements

A Uniquely Entrepreneurial University
Goal
solidify Waterloo’s global leadership in all forms of entrepreneurship education and practice
entrepreneurship at Waterloo isn’t business as usual — extending from its classrooms 
to global communities, from research labs to innovative startups, it’s a spirit 
defined by a burning desire to make things better. entrepreneurial spirit is part 
of Waterloo’s dna, from long-standing intellectual property policy that ensures 
creators retain control of their ideas to the networks of support and mentorship 
that enable the commercialization of socially relevant research. Waterloo embraces 
entrepreneurial approaches in teaching, learning and scholarship — educating, 
inspiring and employing people who lead change. 
Over the Next Five Years
Waterloo will lead canada’s innovation agenda and aspire to be recognized as a 
uniquely entrepreneurial university. this institution will enable national and 
international conversations as host of an international leadership summit and 
increase opportunities for entrepreneurial learning and activity. Waterloo’s 
innovative approaches to technology, social innovation and social entrepreneurship 
will create recognizable impact — fuelling economic growth and improving the human 
condition. 
Background
innovation in teaching, research and scholarship, and experiential learning — best 
exemplified by co-op education — are longstanding pillars of this institution. 
together they have underpinned Waterloo’s distinctive success in entrepreneurial 
pursuits. Waterloo is uniquely placed among universities to address the growing 
societal need for both commercial and non-commercial knowledge discovery and 
entrepreneurial output. 
Entrepreneurial Approaches to Education
entrepreneurship is promoted both in academic programs and in practice at Waterloo. 
the university offers a unique graduate degree in the subject through the Conrad 
Business, entrepreneurship and technology Centre. the centre also manages a 
rapidly growing enterprise Co-op program combining academic student and 
entrepreneurship work terms, which has seen a 10-fold increase in undergraduate 
demand in the last three years. at the undergraduate level, Waterloo takes an 
unconventional approach to Business education by linking it to specific disciplines 
as in degree programs including: arts and Business, environment and Business, 
Computer science and Business administration, recreation and Business and science 
and Business. the latest addition to these binary degrees is recreation and sports 
Business. Waterloo’s co-op program is perhaps the most fruitful educational format 
for new practical knowledge and product development, as work term opportunities 
allow students to observe and participate in innovation in the marketplace or laboratory. 

An Entrepreneurial Ecosystem
Waterloo has created a vibrant ecosystem of entrepreneurship within the university. 
entrepreneurial practices are encouraged and range from start-ups devised by student 
innovators, to radical knowledge discovery in the fields of quantum computing and 
nanotechnology that promise new applications in the industrial arena. student 
entrepreneurship, which has tended to focus on software development, is nurtured 
in the living-learning environment of veloCity, and operationalized in the start-up 
space at veloCity Garage. for students, faculty and staff ready to bring their innovation 
to market, the University of Waterloo Commercialization office (WatCo) can assist in 
developing patents and identifying sources of venture capital. the new accelerator 
Centre at Waterloo’s stratford Campus provides mentorship, educational programs 
and support services to local start-up companies in the field of technical and 
digital media. in addition to its leadership in promoting technological innovation, 
Waterloo is also a catalyst for social innovation and social entrepreneurship 
through the Waterloo institute for social innovation and resilience, the Waterloo 
institute for Complexity and innovation and its partnership with the Centre for 
international Governance innovation.
Creator-Owned Intellectual Property Policy
intellectual property and commercialized innovations originating from students, 
faculty or staff remain the property of the innovator and not the university. 
this policy, which is not typical of the academic world, has proven to be a key 
factor in the vibrant growth of entrepreneurship at Waterloo. Waterloo’s enduring 
search for innovation and relevance has produced a culture of entrepreneurship. 
this unique culture now promises to become a truly defining characteristic of 
Waterloo’s future profile. 
priMArY objectives
Enhance student opportunities to participate in entrepreneurial activities
Build relationships and generate opportunities with the regional entrepreneurial 
community
Advance commercialization and other forms of utilization of leading- edge 
entrepreneurial research and intellectual property
Promote innovation and entrepreneurship that spans a wide range of needs, 
including social, political, health, environmental and technological
Make entrepreneurship a key element of the Waterloo brand

supporting Actions
Increasing the number of students who participate in entrepreneurial work 
opportunities as part of experiential learning
Supporting entrepreneurial activities leading to start-up company creation
Facilitating student, faculty and staff entrepreneurship in a broad range of fields, 
including social entrepreneurship (not-for-profit)
Encouraging, supporting and promoting student, faculty and staff entrepreneurship
Encouraging research into entrepreneurship
Developing learning opportunities to address entrepreneurship in relevant courses
Strengthening entrepreneurship linkages with co-op education
Promoting awareness of Waterloo’s leadership in entrepreneurship externally
Leveraging the entrepreneurial skills of alumni

Transformational Research
Goal
increase the worldwide impact and recognition of University of Waterloo research
starting at the undergraduate level research at Waterloo is ignited by a shared 
passion for discovery and action. Curiosity becomes a quest to answer existing 
and emerging global challenges. experience shows that learning is enhanced when 
it includes research, and that strong researchers have the tools to be talented 
teachers. Waterloo researchers redefine what is known about the world around us. 
they shed new light on the mysteries of the universe through deep and fundamental 
research. 
Over the Next Five Years
Waterloo will expand research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, 
including through research-focused work terms. Waterloo will allocate current 
resources and align future resources to support areas of research where we have 
the greatest potential for world leadership, including quantum science, water and aging.
Background
landmark research — addressing major challenges that arise from the interaction 
of social, economic, scientific, technological, health and policy issues — calls 
for input and collaboration from the finest scholars. Waterloo has built a reputation 
for excellence in research across all six of its faculties and in many disciplines.
Mathematics and Science Leadership
for example, the university’s renown in the fields of computer science, discrete 
mathematics, cryptography and biostatistics has emerged from the Faculty of Mathematics. 
the Faculty of science is recognized for prominence in the natural sciences including 
ecotoxicology, aquatic biology, analytical and materials chemistry, earth sciences, 
condensed matter physics and astronomy; as well as in the applied sciences including 
neuroscience, ocular pathology, technology and optics and drug delivery within the 
schools of optometry and Pharmacy. 
Engineering and Applied Health Sciences
in the Faculty of engineering, more than 1,000 industry and government partners 
support leading-edge research in information and communications technologies, 
automotive, sensors and intelligent infrastructure, water treatment, biomedical 
devices and biotechnology, nano- and micro-technologies, energy, design, modeling 
and systems optimization. 

the Faculty of Applied health sciences is a global leader in the development of 
strategies that improve well-being through advanced research in chronic disease 
prevention and management, healthy active aging, youth health, public health 
policy and practice, nutrition and human movement.
Arts A reseArch leAder
Waterloo’s Faculty of Arts is changing the landscape of social sciences and 
humanities research by harnessing new technologies and methodologies to traditional 
modes of analysis. this will generate new insights into the human condition in areas 
including finance and accounting, clinical and social psychology, digital media, 
science and technology studies, languages, literatures and culture, international 
governance and public policy.
Environment Sets New Standards
Within the Faculty of environment, interdisciplinary groups collaborate with other 
faculties to solve climate change, water, energy, food systems, ecological restoration 
and urban planning issues through science and policy. the faculty’s new teaching and 
research initiatives in green entrepreneurship and corporate social responsibility 
are setting a new agenda for social entrepreneurship and innovation.
Six Strong Faculties, Stronger Together
Pressing and emerging global challenges will increasingly be addressed through 
collaboration across disciplines. Waterloo will continue to support and nurture 
the interdisciplinary culture that fuels its globally recognized research institutes.
Quantum Science and Nanotechnology
the institute for Quantum Computing (iQC) brings together internationally recognized 
researchers from mathematics, science and engineering to discover and develop methods 
to understand and control the quantum world leading to the development of revolutionary 
technologies. researchers from science and engineering come together in the Waterloo 
institute for nanotechnology (Win), where they undertake groundbreaking research into 
the observation and manipulation of matter at the atomic scale to further scientific 
understanding, and to devise applications that will lead to new materials and devices 
in such fields as biomaterials, medicine and electronics. 

Water, Digital Media and Aging
more than 125 Waterloo researchers from many disciplines collaborate in the Water 
institute (Wi), engaging in research both scientific and management-related to 
ensure the sustainability of global water resources. the Games institute is leading 
interdisciplinary research into game-related interactions and technologies, as well 
as to improve understanding of social and behavioural ramifications of gaming. and 
the new research institute for aging (ria) will draw on the expertise of researchers, 
educators, caregivers, seniors and families in order to build an inclusive knowledge 
base to support the development of innovative and relevant educational and training 
programs. 
Building on this foundation of excellence, Waterloo’s research capabilities will 
continue to thrive, fuelling this institution’s growth. Basic, foundational research 
of the highest calibre will continue to be undertaken by faculty and students. 
research activities and output will continue to be integrated into both co-op and 
non-co-op programs. research and scholarship will continue to be a driving force 
for Waterloo’s professoriate.
the original knowledge created within Waterloo will achieve even greater relevance 
as it is promoted and disseminated throughout an industrial and business community 
urgently seeking innovative concepts to commercialize. this longstanding Waterloo 
tradition will be the pillar that will ensure this institution’s future as a leader 
in research productivity, application and commercialization. 
Primary Objectives
Be recognized internationally for excellence and innovation in education, research 
and scholarship
Enable conditions which support research excellence and impact 
Identify and seize opportunities to lead in new/emerging areas
Increase interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary research at the global, national 
and local scale
Strengthen the relationship between research and teaching at the undergraduate level
Build wider awareness and understanding of Waterloo’s research productivity and impact
Seek global awareness of Waterloo’s research and teaching expertise

supporting Actions
Attracting and retaining premier level scholars, researchers and staff 
Fostering a supportive environment for research by facilitating access to funding 
resources, information, space and facilities
Providing strategic expertise to maximize research grant success
Diversifying funding resources beyond Tri-Council sources
Encouraging research networks which build on partnerships with internationally 
recognized universities
Providing and facilitating opportunities for interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary research
Providing opportunities for undergraduate students to engage in research across all disciplines
Building further exemplary international research networks of elite institutions 
and individuals that utilize the intellectual and physical assets of the institution
Celebrating the research successes of students, faculty, staff and alumni 
Pursuing prestigious national and international awards for faculty
Creating a new marketing and communications initiative to build profile for the wide 
and varied accomplishments of the Waterloo research community
Continuing to be an effective pipeline for high-quality research to meet the needs 
of business, industry, government and civil society

Building on a Foundation of Excellence
Waterloo has already distinguished itself in these important areas of existing 
strength, which will be further enhanced through this strategic plan:
outstanding academic programming
global prominence and internationalization
vibrant student experience
robust employer-staff relationship
sound value system

Outstanding Academic Programming
Goals
A 
offer leading-edge, dynamic academic programs
b 
Be a leading provider of technology-enabled learning opportunities

a shared passion for learning and discovery brings some of the world’s top students 
and scholars to Waterloo. they are drawn by a foundational commitment to top-quality 
academic programming, which is emboldened by an innovative and dynamic approach to 
learning that is uniquely Waterloo’s. top students and faculty expect the best from 
Waterloo’s academic programs and supports. Waterloo will continue to deliver.
Over the Next Five Years
academic programming at Waterloo will evolve and grow, supported by faculty who 
engage and inspire through their teaching and research. Waterloo will set an ambitious 
agenda to lead in the implementation and use of new and emerging technologies. 
Waterloo will be a leader in developing and employing such technologies to enhance 
learning, to reshape the traditional classroom and to expand the impact and reach 
of Waterloo programs on its campuses, and beyond. 
Background
meeting consistently high standards, Waterloo’s academic programs are one of the 
university’s pillars of strength. Both at the university and at its federated 
University (st. Jerome’s) and affiliated University Colleges (Conrad Grebel, 
renison and st. Paul’s), faculty members are engaged in teaching, research and 
the delivery of unique programs. this is a direct result of the university’s 
policy of hiring the very best faculty and staff, and providing an environment 
that will allow the university to reach its full potential. With a foundation of 
excellent faculty and strong academic programs, along with the opportunity to 
engage in experiential learning, Waterloo’s undergraduate programs are in high 
demand and attract students of the highest calibre. forty-two per cent of all 
students entering undergraduate programs at the university have a high school 
average mark of 90% or higher. 
Waterloo has thus created an educational environment in which research, scholarship 
and learning are inseparable at both undergraduate and graduate levels, and where 
relevance, innovation, creativity and application are concepts that drive the academic agenda. 

A Program development
Partnership is one of Waterloo’s methods of ensuring the highest quality of graduate 
research programs. the university has partnered with selected international universities 
to develop dual degree doctorate (co-tutelle) programs in the fields of chemistry, 
physics, nanotechnology, earth sciences and several branches of engineering. the 
Perimeter institute has also partnered with the university to offer a master’s level 
program in research training through its Perimeter scholars international. Based in 
Waterloo, the institute is an independent, non-profit science research organization, 
renowned worldwide for groundbreaking work in the field of foundational theoretical physics.
Waterloo continuously develops new programs to address new knowledge demands that 
arise from societal change. recent introductions include master’s degrees in climate 
change, public issues anthropology, sustainability management, digital experience 
innovation and mathematics for teachers. a new Phd program in pharmacy will begin 
in 2013. many of these new graduate degrees are offered in an online format to enable 
access for professionals working in their fields, wherever they are geographically located.
b Technology-enabled delivery systems for learning
the use of new technologies for program delivery offers an enormous opportunity to 
reach wider educational markets both across Canada and around the world, and to 
deliver programs to graduates and professionals where they live and work. Waterloo 
can make a significant societal contribution by bringing the benefits of outstanding 
academic programs to those in far-flung locations, and at the same time achieve a 
wider awareness nationally and globally of the university’s role as a provider of 
quality education.
technology-enabled learning is a concept that Waterloo embraced many years ago for 
its distance-learning programs, first through the use of cassettes and now through 
emerging technologies and the internet. the university provides online courses that 
assist on-campus students with scheduling or job-related time conflicts, and allow 
off-campus and distant students to pursue the course requirements necessary for 
graduation. several graduate degrees are offered fully online and more are planned, 
in part to meet the needs of working professionals. the university also provides 
credential courses to meet certain professional accreditation requirements and 
skills tailored to specific career needs. 

Primary Objectives
A Program development
Educate graduates uniquely prepared to address the challenges and opportunities 
of the 21st century
Enhance Waterloo’s excellence in academic programs
Ensure teaching quality of the highest international standard 
Assign a higher value to recognizing and rewarding high-quality teaching
Seek global awareness of Waterloo’s research and teaching expertise

b Technology-enabled delivery systems for learning
Expand Waterloo’s footprint in the online-learning market
Provide leading-edge, technology-enabled learning opportunities

supporting Actions
A Program development
Increasing the number of top level undergraduate and graduate students from 
national and international sources
Increasing the value of teaching quality and adopting a teaching-learning charter 
that captures Waterloo’s commitment to teaching and learning
Encouraging faculty members to integrate their research and the process of research 
into course activities 
Regularly collecting input from students on ways to improve the learning experience
Ensuring that graduate students at Waterloo are supervised and mentored by the highest 
calibre of research personnel
Strengthening excellence in teaching skills at Waterloo for both graduate students 
and faculty
Articulating assessable learning outcomes and designing meaningful assessment methods 
for all academic courses and programs 
Ensuring that graduate programs include components that address professional and 
transferable skills
Improving classroom design and supporting technology-enabled learning to optimize 
the learning experience
Acknowledging the changing balance between teaching and research as faculty members 
progress, and reflecting this in resource planning

b Technology-enabled delivery systems for learning
Increasing the number of online courses and degree programs
Employing the most innovative methods of course delivery and new learning technologies 
Identifying external academic or skills needs and developing relevant new programs 
for online delivery to meet those needs
Making wider use of online course materials, including, for example, Massive Open 
Online Courses (MOOCs), corporate training modules and professional development courses
Creating and facilitating strategic partnerships in online learning provincially, 
nationally and internationally 
Increasing the use of mobile technologies in and out of the classroom for learning 
and support services
Expanding the appropriate use of technologies to enhance classroom learning experience

Global Prominence and Internationalization
Goal
Become one of the most internationalized universities in Canada
Broad impact requires broad understanding and outlook. as a university committed 
to improving the world and to educating graduates ready to lead in a global economy, 
Waterloo maintains an enviable and expanding network of international research and 
industry partnerships, alumni connections, learning opportunities, work placements 
and field programs. research and learning are enhanced by the contributions of 
international students and faculty who offer diversity of experience and insight 
vital to the pursuit of knowledge and discovery. Waterloo is a place the world 
turns to for answers to its most pressing questions. 
Over the Next Five Years
Waterloo will offer more opportunities for international exchange, service learning, 
field programs and co-op employment. the university will grow its global research 
network and be recognized internationally for excellence in education, research 
and scholarship. Waterloo will embrace global viewpoints and experience, attracting 
a diverse and growing group of the best and brightest international students and 
faculty to its campuses. 
Background
internationalization includes a wide range of information, activities, policies 
and strategies, which give teaching, research and service functions an international 
dimension at the university. Waterloo graduates are at home in a culturally diverse 
environment and knowledgeable about its attributes.
connected to the World
international connectivity offers major benefits in terms of professional, research 
and employment linkages, as well as in social networking to improve cultural 
understanding and diversity. Waterloo actively promotes outbound academic and 
research mobility through co-op opportunities, exchange programs and research 
collaboration; and promotes inbound mobility by foreign students and researchers 
participating in Waterloo programs and research. Currently, 11 per cent of 
undergraduate students are international, predominantly from China, india, 
Pakistan and south Korea. Graduate programs in global governance are offered by 
the Balsillie school of international affairs, through a collaborative format 
drawing together scholars, students and policy-makers focused on finding solutions 
to pressing issues.

Enhanced International Presence
enlarging and enhancing Waterloo’s presence in the international arena is a 
priority for the university. this will be achieved by providing academic services 
of the highest order, attracting the best and brightest faculty, students and 
research graduates from around the world, and partnering with international 
institutions of high reputation — such as existing partnerships with tsinghua 
University, University of Hong Kong, national University of singapore, University 
of Queensland, École Polytechnique, technische Universitaet muenchen, etH Zurich 
and Universidade de são Paulo. raising Waterloo’s international profile will 
heighten its prestige and ranking on the global stage.
Primary Objectives
Be recognized internationally for excellence and innovation in education, 
research and scholarship
Educate globally literate and world-ready graduates

supporting Actions
Creating student mobility programs that utilize the best universities and 
practices in the world in support of academic exchange, international service 
learning, field programs and international co-op placements
Enhancing whenever appropriate, the international content and approach of degree 
programs
Building further exemplary international research networks of elite institutions 
and individuals that utilize the intellectual and physical assets of the institution
Attracting a diverse group of the best and the brightest international students 
to Waterloo’s campuses through the provision of an outstanding student experience, 
academically and socially

Vibrant Student Experience
Goal
ensure that students have an engaging, purposeful and relevant experience
With a global reputation for excellence and some of the highest entrance averages 
in the nation, Waterloo attracts the world’s best, brightest and most motivated 
students, offering them the opportunity to become something more. students are 
inspired in an environment of imagination, innovation and interdisciplinary 
endeavours. the confluence of remarkable classroom, campus and community 
experience at Waterloo transforms excellent students into extraordinary alumni 
uniquely equipped to contribute to society and lead change.
Over the Next Five Years
Waterloo will enrich the student experience with a student-focused approach to 
services. the university will expand the range of experiences, programs and 
supports designed to develop student potential, and build a stronger sense of 
community connection for students both on and off campus. 
Background
students come to Waterloo for high-quality education and, in the case of co-op, 
for relevant work experience. But they also study, use a wide range of campus 
facilities and engage socially with others. for many students, the university 
campus is their “home base” for several years. it is also where faculty and 
staff interact with students and each other as they go about their daily business.
A Spirit of Community and Connection
the educational component of a student’s life on campus will be vibrant and 
fulfilling, supported by “down-time” activities that are rich, rewarding and 
diverse. Waterloo should not be left behind after graduation, but rather 
remembered with gratitude, fondness and pride, as a place where graduates 
would be happy for their own sons and daughters to be educated. 
Waterloo’s federated University (st. Jerome’s) and affiliated University Colleges 
(Conrad Grebel, renison and st. Paul’s), have been remarkably successful in promoting 
a sense of well-being for students by creating a spirit of fellowship among their 
residents, nurturing faculty-student engagement and giving students many leadership 
opportunities to thrive as responsible and compassionate citizens here and around 
the globe. 

A Network of Support and Opportunity
Waterloo created the student success office and Counselling services to address 
the need for emotional and academic support for students. organizations, including 
the organizational and Human development office, offer valuable student leadership 
opportunities which should be recognized and expanded as crucial to the development 
of future leaders. 
student organizations on campus can provide a sense of community for like minds. 
the university will continue to work to create an encompassing sense of community 
that engages all those on campus, including faculty and staff. 
for students, the years at Waterloo should provide both an excellent education and 
an enriching experience of campus life, enabling each student to reach her or his 
potential in the fullest sense.
Primary Objectives
Deliver excellent student services through an integrated student-focused approach 
Provide enabling experiences, programs and supports, including student leadership 
development opportunities, in order to develop student potential
Develop strong partnerships within and between academic and non-academic units to 
enhance the positive student experience
Build a community of communities by providing an environment where students, faculty 
and staff can connect
Deepen the connections between students and the City of Waterloo community


supporting Actions
Incorporating mentorship of students into curricular and co-curricular programs 
wherever possible
Creating a strong virtual environment so students always feel connected to Waterloo, 
wherever they are physically located
Enabling an IT environment that facilitates student interaction and improves student life
Providing the means for students to interact across different programs
Integrating and optimizing processes, communications and systems to support student success
Encouraging collaborative, multidisciplinary projects in undergraduate coursework to 
enhance learning and teamwork skills
Enhancing research, study and social space 
Improving support services for students who live off-campus
Enhancing the physic al appearance of the campus to be more attractive and people-centric

Robust Employer-Staff Relationship
Goal
Be an exemplary employer
the success of this institution’s programs, research and students hinges on a superior 
complement of high-functioning staff. as an institution that expects outstanding results 
from all of its people, Waterloo aspires to be an employer of choice, and a place where 
opportunity and experience inspire deep institutional pride and professional satisfaction. 
enabling top performance from staff members, who achieve their full potential, 
professionally and personally, is key to Waterloo’s mission as an institution of 
higher learning.
Over the Next Five Years
Waterloo will offer new opportunities for staff to grow professionally, with 
investments in development and leadership training and an enhanced focus on 
succession planning. Waterloo will become an international employer of choice for 
talented, motivated individuals whose support and engagement will ensure the 
institution’s continued successes. in support of achieving our priorities, 
Waterloo will measure performance against external standards for global excellence, 
and ensure rigorous management to attain these benchmarks. 
Background
and encourage its staff to develop higher-level skills through ongoing training 
and professional development.the effectiveness of the research agenda, program 
delivery and administrative functions of Waterloo relies upon a superior complement 
of staff. in this regard, the University of Waterloo has worked diligently in many 
ways to be an exemplary employer and an employer of choice. the university will 
continue to provide challenging career opportunities for its staff 
Primary Objectives
Be a destination of choice for superior individuals seeking employment
Enable staff to fulfill their potential in a career at the university

supporting Actions
Attracting and retaining the highest quality candidates
Providing staff with opportunities to acquire new competencies 
Encouraging a more diverse work experience for staff through trial periods of 
different roles, responsibilities and positions
Supporting mentoring skills training for managers
Continuing to be competitive in the job market
Having the employment attributes of the university judged against an external 
standard for excellence
Encouraging Faculties and academic support units to undertake succession planning 
for key leadership position

Promoting a Sound Value System
Goals
A 
enhance the well-being of students, faculty and staff

b 
Promote integrity as a core value of the campus community

c 
Provide an equitable and inclusive environment for students, faculty and staff

as an international leader and standard-bearer in higher education, Waterloo is 
unshakeable in its commitment to integrity, equity, diversity and a balanced life 
for students, faculty and staff. Without these core values, the university cannot 
fulfill its mission as a leading institution of higher learning.
Over the Next Five Years
Waterloo will expand its efforts to ensure integrity is a core value instilled in 
every student, faculty member and staff member. the university will seek new and 
better ways to support mental and physical well-being, promote school pride and 
support equity and diversity, enabling the ongoing success of all members of the 
campus community.
Background
A Balanced life:
modern life makes many competing demands on an individual’s time. the 
responsibility of caring for a sick child or elderly parent, for example, at 
the same time as addressing work requirements can lead to stress-related problems. 
extended periods of work overload can also trigger health problems. fulfilling 
one’s responsibilities at work, home and in the community requires effective time 
management practices. 
Work-Life Balance
it is in the university’s best interests to assist students, faculty and staff, 
as far as possible, to maintain an appropriate balance between work demands and 
those beyond the purview of the university. this approach will help to minimize 
problems of stress-related illness and absenteeism, and to enhance the university’s 
ability to attract and retain quality faculty and staff.

Enhancing Shared Campus Spaces
in the case of on-campus students, very many of their academic and non-academic 
activities occur in the confines of university buildings, accommodation and 
recreational facilities. to enhance the overall experience of learning and 
living at Waterloo, the university will make every effort to provide additional 
space to allow greater social interaction and mentorship opportunities, and foster 
a greater sense of school spirit and pride. support in dealing with stress is one 
of the functions of the student success office, Health services and Counselling services.
b Integrity: 
integrity includes the concepts of honesty, trust, respect, fairness and responsibility. 
academic excellence without personal integrity is of little value to an employer, and 
ultimately proves a major detriment in the career development of a student, faculty 
or staff member. the university is known for creating the leaders for the future, 
and nowhere are honour, respect, reliability and accountability called for more 
than at the highest level of decision-making. Waterloo’s professoriate and staff 
are held to the highest standards of conduct, and its administration is committed 
to open, responsible and fair governance. 
Integrity in All Areas
Waterloo seeks to develop integrity at every level of the institution, and in 
2008 created an academic integrity office, whose initial focus was to partner 
with student groups, faculties and staff to provide information and education 
so that new students understand expectations related to integrity for their 
academic work. integrity has now been widened to be a core value for all aspects 
of university-related life of students, faculty and staff. 
c Embracing equity and diversity
Waterloo is committed to supporting equity and diversity. it does this through 
its accessability office, which provides support for students, faculty and staff 
with disabilities, the Principles of inclusivity sessions offered by the office 
of organizational and Human development, and the University diversity advisory 
Committee (UdaC), which addresses diversity in its many forms. in addition, the 
status of Women and equity Committee (sWeC) — based in the faculty association — 
focuses on matters related to the status of women and broader equity issues among faculty. 

Primary Objectives
A Balanced life
Develop a strong, vibrant integrated community 
Assist students, faculty and staff in achieving appropriate work-life balance
Foster student success through engaging and relevant university-based experiences

b Integrity
Deepen and broaden the university’s approach to integrity

c Equity and diversity
Develop a supportive campus community that proactively articulates, promotes and 
effects change to achieve equity for students, faculty and staff through policies, 
programs and practice

supporting Actions
A Balanced life
Providing diverse, integrated and targeted services to address the mental and 
physical well-being of students, faculty and staff
Creating an environment where students, faculty and staff collaborate in support of one other
Developing activities to promote school pride
Encouraging Faculties to devise activities that foster student-faculty fellowship 
Developing non-academic activities sought by diverse student communities
Increasing the availability of on-campus student accommodation
Promoting and adopting flexible work arrangements where such arrangements are 
consistent with operational needs
Improving communication within the campus community

b Integrity
Determining ways to recognize and celebrate behaviour that exemplifies integrity
Enhancing the existing online tutorial on academic integrity, combined with 
discipline-specific case studies as a milestone for all incoming undergraduate 
and graduate students
Exploring the idea of a student-led honour code, to be implemented by student 
associations with support from administration

c Equity and diversity
Setting up an Equity Office and hiring a Director of Equity 
Developing and enhancing relevant policies, taking into consideration input from 
student, faculty and staff stakeholders, including the AccessAbility office, UDAC and SWEC
Enhancing awareness, understanding, respect, support and celebration of equity 
and diversity among students, faculty and staff
Meeting accessibility standards in new buildings and in those being renovated
Meeting accessibility standards, as outlined in the Accessibility for Ontarians 
with Disabilities Act (AODA), across print and digital communications platforms

Why Waterloo?
Uniquely Qualified to Answer the World's Call
as the world seeks answers, the University of Waterloo stands uniquely ready to 
respond. this institution will rise to be recognized as one of the world’s top 
innovation universities, on the strength of six world class faculties, made even 
stronger through interdisciplinary collaboration, an enviable network of business 
and industry connections and a track record of innovation and excellence.

A Track Record of Innovation and Excellence
Waterloo’s contributions to higher education, global prosperity and the betterment 
of society are many. The Mid-cycle Review identified and solidified Waterloo’s 
ongoing excellence in several key areas:
Producing outstanding and employment-ready graduates as an outcome of world-renowned 
co-op programs, which blend academic learning with work experience. these programs 
act as a bridge between Waterloo and the world outside, underscoring relevance as 
one of the university’s foundational principles. academic knowledge, job readiness 
and confidence keep Waterloo graduates in high demand with employers. this array of 
employers provides Waterloo students with a more diverse and stimulating range of 
workplace experiences than is available anywhere else.

entrepreneurial successes achieved by students, faculty and staff. all of Waterloo’s 
past and potential entrepreneurs benefit from the university’s intellectual property 
(ip) policy, whereby ideas or products commercialized by students, faculty or staff 
members belong solely to the creator. entrepreneurial enterprises are further supported 
by strong connections between Waterloo research and industry.

ongoing innovation and entrepreneurship. innovative and creative approaches to research, 
teaching and learning are sought from — and achieved by — Waterloo’s faculty and staff, 
and inspired in its students. for example, to support a growing number of students 
interested in entrepreneurship, the university in 2008 established velocity, a 
living-learning community of like-minded entrepreneurial students. at veloCity, 
students have access to the latest technologies and are mentored by a network of 
entrepreneurial experts. in 2010, veloCity Garage was set up to provide students 
and alumni with access to free space and expert mentoring to assist in advancing 
successful start-ups. in 2012, the veloCity Campus program began to expand 
entrepreneurial programs and mentorship to the broader student community.

excellence in research. research and scholarship will continue to be a driving 
force for Waterloo’s professoriate. according to research infosource, Waterloo 
has been Canada’s top ranked comprehensive research university for five consecutive 
years. as one of Canada’s 15 research-intensive universities, Waterloo has 34 
senate-approved centres or institutes of research crossing many disciplines.these 
research ventures are underpinned by a distinguished professoriate whose reputation 
draws top-level graduates from around the world. 

Persistently seeking out the cutting edge of discovery. Waterloo is poised once 
again to lead the world in the revolutionary fields of quantum computing and 
nanotechnology, which have the potential to transform the world as we know it — 
from how we share and store information, to the ways we diagnose and treat disease. 
the recently opened mike & ophelia lazaridis Quantum-nano Centre is home to the 
institute for Quantum Computing (iQC) and the Waterloo institute for nanotechnology 
(Win), which attract some of the finest minds in these fields.

applying Waterloo’s customary forward-looking vision to respond to key educational 
advances by incorporating innovation, relevance and value in curriculum development 
and delivery. this includes technology-enabled learning, allowing a growing number 
of courses to be accessible online to a broad set of learners in ontario and beyond. 
a pioneer in distance education going back to 1968, Waterloo is now one of the largest 
institutions of online learning in ontario. a major grant is allowing the Conrad Business, 
entrepreneurship and technology Centre to use advanced learning technology systems to 
create and deliver a unique virtual incubation Program to support the development of 
local, Canadian and international entrepreneurs.

the ability to attract highly qualified students and a research-oriented professoriate 
from around the world brings an international dimension to Waterloo’s student body, 
to its research endeavours and to its connectivity. this international dimension 
includes collaboration with global business enterprises, governmental agencies and 
other major academic institutions. it also accounts for the university’s involvement 
in social and environmental issues in Canada and in countries around the world.

Entrepreneurial Impact
Faculty startups:
Certicom
maplesoft
opentext
teledyne dalsa

Alumni startups:
BlackBerry® 
desire2learn
Public History inc.

velocity startup success:
45 companies
250+ jobs
$90M+ in investment capital

*as of april 2013

A Global University
30 per cent international graduate students
11 per cent international undergraduate students
Waterloo students come from 90+ countries
350+ educational and research agreements with institutions in 60 countries
Co-op opportunities in 90 countries
700 international co-op opportunities each year

Employment-Ready Graduates
co-op 2013: 
17,500 students
3,000 employers 

A decade of growth:
139,000 undergraduate students enrolled in 140+ co-op programs over the past 10 years

Leader in Online Learning
297 online courses
Five fully online undergraduate degree programs 
11 approved online graduate programs with more in development
Research Leaders
leading faculty:
26 active fellows of the royal society of Canada
two Canada excellence research Chairs (CerCs)
62 Canada research Chairs (CrCs)
23 industrial and endowed chairs

leading research institutes:
Games institute
institute for Quantum Computing
Propel Centre for Population Health impact
research institute on aging
WatCar (automotive)
Water institute
Waterloo institute for nanotechnology
Waterloo institute for sustainable energy

Little wonder that for 21 consecutive years Maclean’s magazine has named the 
University of Waterloo canada’s most innovative university; and for 14 of the 
past 21 years has named this institution most likely to produce “the leaders of 
tomorrow.” The university is proud of its many successes.

Poised for Action
Waterloo has much to be proud of. Built by entrepreneurs, the University of 
Waterloo is a place where innovation has impact. 
no ivory tower, this is an institution uniquely connected to the world, and 
committed to making it better — by fuelling prosperity and improving the human 
condition. this is a place of constant forward motion. 
a magnet for the best and brightest from around the world, Waterloo converts 
the strong into the extraordinary — students who graduate ready to lead in their 
careers, faculty who inspire through world-class teaching, and world-changing 
research ignited by the spirit of entrepreneurship.
a young institution, Waterloo swiftly outpaced its national and global peers to 
rise through the ranks of higher education. unconventional from the start, Waterloo 
forges new paths, redefining higher education as relevant and meaningful.
already a world leader in research that creates new understanding of quantum science, 
water and aging, Waterloo aspires to even greater success.
the University of Waterloo strategic Plan will create a differentiated university 
for the province and the country, one that offers a unique experiential learning 
experience for every student; one that focuses on entrepreneurship to create new 
companies, new jobs, even new industries; one that manages for global excellence; 
one that will be a world leader in select and pivotal areas of research with 
strong research foundations throughout. 
this plan reflects pride in all Waterloo has accomplished and aspirations for what 
can be achieved. over the next five years, on the collective strength of its 
stakeholders, Waterloo can and will lead Canada’s innovation agenda, redefining 
higher education for this country and the world.
Waterloo will answer the world’s call.

200 UNIVERSITY AVENUE WEST, WATERLOO, ON, CANADA N2L 3G1 | UWATERLOO.CA
Brandmark of the University of Waterloo